### Military

Main articles: [Imperial Roman army](/wiki/Imperial_Roman_army 'Imperial Roman army') and [Structural history of the Roman military](/wiki/Structural_history_of_the_Roman_military 'Structural history of the Roman military')

After the [Punic Wars](/wiki/Punic_Wars 'Punic Wars'), the Roman army comprised professional soldiers who volunteered for 20 years of active duty and five as reserves. The transition to a professional military began during the late Republic and was one of the many profound shifts away from republicanism, under which an army of [conscript citizens](/wiki/Conscripts 'Conscripts') defended the homeland against a specific threat. The Romans expanded their war machine by \"organizing the communities that they conquered in Italy into a system that generated huge reservoirs of manpower for their army.\" By Imperial times, military service was a full-time career. The pervasiveness of military garrisons throughout the Empire was a major influence in the process of [Romanization](</wiki/Romanization_(cultural)> 'Romanization (cultural)').

The primary mission of the military of the early empire was to preserve the [Pax Romana](/wiki/Pax_Romana 'Pax Romana'). The three major divisions of the military were:

- the garrison at Rome, comprising the [Praetorian Guard](/wiki/Praetorian_Guard 'Praetorian Guard'), the _[cohortes urbanae](/wiki/Cohortes_urbanae 'Cohortes urbanae')_ and the _[vigiles](/wiki/Vigiles 'Vigiles')_, who functioned as police and firefighters;
- the provincial army, comprising the [Roman legions](/wiki/Roman_legions 'Roman legions') and the auxiliaries provided by the provinces _([auxilia](/wiki/Auxilia 'Auxilia')_);
- the [navy](/wiki/Roman_navy 'Roman navy').

Through his military reforms, which included consolidating or disbanding units of questionable loyalty, Augustus regularized the legion. A legion was organized into ten [cohorts](</wiki/Cohort_(military_unit)> 'Cohort (military unit)'), each of which comprised six [centuries](/wiki/Centuria 'Centuria'), with a century further made up of ten squads _([contubernia](/wiki/Contubernium 'Contubernium'))_; the exact size of the Imperial legion, which was likely determined by [logistics](/wiki/Military_logistics 'Military logistics'), has been estimated to range from 4,800 to 5,280. After Germanic tribes wiped out three legions in the [Battle of the Teutoburg Forest](/wiki/Battle_of_the_Teutoburg_Forest 'Battle of the Teutoburg Forest') in 9 AD, the number of legions was increased from 25 to around 30. The army had about 300,000 soldiers in the 1st century, and under 400,000 in the 2nd, \"significantly smaller\" than the collective armed forces of the conquered territories. No more than 2% of adult males living in the Empire served in the Imperial army. Augustus also created the [Praetorian Guard](/wiki/Praetorian_Guard 'Praetorian Guard'): nine cohorts, ostensibly to maintain the public peace, which were garrisoned in Italy. Better paid than the legionaries, the Praetorians served only sixteen years.

The _auxilia_ were recruited from among the non-citizens. Organized in smaller units of roughly cohort strength, they were paid less than the legionaries, and after 25 years of service were rewarded with [Roman citizenship](/wiki/Roman_citizenship 'Roman citizenship'), also extended to their sons. According to [Tacitus](/wiki/Tacitus 'Tacitus') there were roughly as many auxiliaries as there were legionaries---thus, around 125,000 men, implying approximately 250 auxiliary regiments. The [Roman cavalry](/wiki/Roman_cavalry 'Roman cavalry') of the earliest Empire were primarily from Celtic, Hispanic or Germanic areas. Several aspects of training and equipment derived from the Celts.

The [Roman navy](/wiki/Roman_navy 'Roman navy') not only aided in the supply and transport of the legions but also in the protection of the [frontiers](</wiki/Limes_(Roman_Empire)> 'Limes (Roman Empire)') along the rivers [Rhine](/wiki/Rhine 'Rhine') and [Danube](/wiki/Danube 'Danube'). Another duty was protecting maritime trade against pirates. It patrolled the Mediterranean, parts of the [North Atlantic](/wiki/Atlantic 'Atlantic') coasts, and the [Black Sea](/wiki/Black_Sea 'Black Sea'). Nevertheless, the army was considered the senior and more prestigious branch.

### Provincial government

An annexed territory became a [Roman province](/wiki/Roman_province 'Roman province') in three steps: making a register of cities, taking a census, and surveying the land. Further government recordkeeping included births and deaths, real estate transactions, taxes, and juridical proceedings. In the 1st and 2nd centuries, the central government sent out around 160 officials annually to govern outside Italy. Among these officials were the [Roman governors](/wiki/Roman_governor 'Roman governor'): [magistrates elected at Rome](/wiki/Executive_magistrates_of_the_Roman_Empire 'Executive magistrates of the Roman Empire') who in the name of the [Roman people](/wiki/SPQR 'SPQR') governed [senatorial provinces](/wiki/Senatorial_province 'Senatorial province'); or governors, usually of equestrian rank, who held their _imperium_ on behalf of the emperor in [imperial provinces](/wiki/Imperial_province 'Imperial province'), most notably [Roman Egypt](/wiki/Roman_Egypt 'Roman Egypt'). A governor had to make himself accessible to the people he governed, but he could delegate various duties. His staff, however, was minimal: his official attendants _([apparitores](/wiki/Apparitor 'Apparitor'))_, including [lictors](/wiki/Lictor 'Lictor'), heralds, messengers, [scribes](</wiki/Scriba_(ancient_Rome)> 'Scriba (ancient Rome)'), and bodyguards; [legates](/wiki/Legatus 'Legatus'), both civil and military, usually of equestrian rank; and friends who accompanied him unofficially.

Other officials were appointed as supervisors of government finances. Separating fiscal responsibility from justice and administration was a reform of the Imperial era, to avoid provincial governors and [tax farmers](</wiki/Farm_(revenue_leasing)> 'Farm (revenue leasing)') exploiting local populations for personal gain. Equestrian [procurators](</wiki/Procurator_(Roman)> 'Procurator (Roman)'), whose authority was originally \"extra-judicial and extra-constitutional,\" managed both state-owned property and the personal property of the emperor _([res privata](/wiki/Privatus 'Privatus'))_. Because Roman government officials were few, a provincial who needed help with a legal dispute or criminal case might seek out any Roman perceived to have some official capacity.

### Law

Main article: [Roman law](/wiki/Roman_law 'Roman law')

Roman courts held [original jurisdiction](/wiki/Original_jurisdiction 'Original jurisdiction') over cases involving Roman citizens throughout the empire, but there were too few judicial functionaries to impose Roman law uniformly in the provinces. Most parts of the Eastern Empire already had well-established law codes and juridical procedures. Generally, it was Roman policy to respect the _mos regionis_ (\"regional tradition\" or \"law of the land\") and to regard local laws as a source of legal precedent and social stability. The compatibility of Roman and local law was thought to reflect an underlying _[ius gentium](/wiki/Ius_gentium 'Ius gentium')_, the \"law of nations\" or [international law](/wiki/International_law 'International law') regarded as common and customary. If provincial law conflicted with Roman law or custom, Roman courts heard [appeals](/wiki/Appellate_court 'Appellate court'), and the emperor held final decision-making authority.

In the West, law had been administered on a highly localized or tribal basis, and [private property rights](/wiki/Private_property_rights 'Private property rights') may have been a novelty of the Roman era, particularly among [Celts](/wiki/Celts 'Celts'). Roman law facilitated the acquisition of wealth by a pro-Roman elite. The extension of universal citizenship to all free inhabitants of the Empire in 212 required the uniform application of Roman law, replacing local law codes that had applied to non-citizens. Diocletian\'s efforts to stabilize the Empire after the [Crisis of the Third Century](/wiki/Crisis_of_the_Third_Century 'Crisis of the Third Century') included two major compilations of law in four years, the _[Codex Gregorianus](/wiki/Codex_Gregorianus 'Codex Gregorianus')_ and the _[Codex Hermogenianus](/wiki/Codex_Hermogenianus 'Codex Hermogenianus')_, to guide provincial administrators in setting consistent legal standards.

The pervasiveness of Roman law throughout Western Europe enormously influenced the Western legal tradition, reflected by continued use of [Latin legal terminology](/wiki/List_of_legal_Latin_terms 'List of legal Latin terms') in modern law.

### Taxation

Further information: [Taxation in ancient Rome](/wiki/Taxation_in_ancient_Rome 'Taxation in ancient Rome')

Taxation under the Empire amounted to about 5% of its [gross product](/wiki/Roman_gross_domestic_product 'Roman gross domestic product'). The typical tax rate for individuals ranged from 2 to 5%. The tax code was \"bewildering\" in its complicated system of [direct](/wiki/Direct_taxation 'Direct taxation') and [indirect taxes](/wiki/Indirect_taxes 'Indirect taxes'), some paid in cash and some [in kind](/wiki/Barter 'Barter'). Taxes might be specific to a province, or kinds of properties such as [fisheries](/wiki/Fishery 'Fishery'); they might be temporary. Tax collection was justified by the need to maintain the military, and taxpayers sometimes got a refund if the army captured a surplus of booty. In-kind taxes were accepted from less-[monetized](/wiki/Monetization 'Monetization') areas, particularly those who could supply grain or goods to army camps. The primary source of direct tax revenue was individuals, who paid a [poll tax](/wiki/Tax_per_head 'Tax per head') and a tax on their land, construed as a tax on its produce or productive capacity. Tax obligations were determined by the census: each head of household provided a headcount of his household, as well as an accounting of his property. A major source of indirect-tax revenue was the _portoria_, customs and tolls on trade, including among provinces. Towards the end of his reign, Augustus instituted a 4% tax on the sale of slaves, which Nero shifted from the purchaser to the dealers, who responded by raising their prices. An owner who manumitted a slave paid a \"freedom tax\", calculated at 5% of value. An [inheritance tax](/wiki/Inheritance_tax 'Inheritance tax') of 5% was assessed when Roman citizens above a certain net worth left property to anyone outside their immediate family. Revenues from the estate tax and from an auction tax went towards the veterans\' pension fund _([aerarium militare](/wiki/Aerarium_militare 'Aerarium militare'))_.

Low taxes helped the Roman aristocracy increase their wealth, which equalled or exceeded the revenues of the central government. An emperor sometimes replenished his treasury by confiscating the estates of the \"super-rich\", but in the later period, the [resistance](/wiki/Tax_resistance 'Tax resistance') of the wealthy to paying taxes was one of the factors contributing to the collapse of the Empire.

## Economy

Main article: [Roman economy](/wiki/Roman_economy 'Roman economy')

The Empire is best thought of as a network of regional economies, based on a form of \"political capitalism\" in which the state regulated commerce to assure its own revenues. Economic growth, though not comparable to modern economies, was greater than that of most other societies prior to [industrialization](/wiki/Industrial_Revolution 'Industrial Revolution'). Territorial conquests permitted a large-scale reorganization of [land use](/wiki/Land_use 'Land use') that resulted in agricultural surplus and specialization, particularly in north Africa. Some cities were known for particular industries. The scale of urban building indicates a significant construction industry. Papyri preserve complex accounting methods that suggest elements of [economic rationalism](/wiki/Economic_rationalism 'Economic rationalism'), and the Empire was highly monetized. Although the means of communication and transport were limited in antiquity, transportation in the 1st and 2nd centuries expanded greatly, and trade routes connected regional economies. The [supply contracts for the army](/wiki/Economics_of_the_Roman_army 'Economics of the Roman army') drew on local suppliers near the base _([castrum](/wiki/Castrum 'Castrum'))_, throughout the province, and across provincial borders. [Economic historians](/wiki/Economic_history 'Economic history') vary in their calculations of the gross domestic product during the Principate. In the sample years of 14, 100, and 150 AD, estimates of per capita GDP range from 166 to 380 _[HS](/wiki/Sestertius 'Sestertius')_. The GDP per capita of [Italy](</wiki/Italia_(Roman_Empire)> 'Italia (Roman Empire)') is estimated as 40 to 66% higher than in the rest of the Empire, due to tax transfers from the provinces and the concentration of elite income.

Economic dynamism resulted in social mobility. Although aristocratic values permeated traditional elite society, wealth requirements for [rank](#Census_rank) indicate a strong tendency towards [plutocracy](/wiki/Plutocracy 'Plutocracy'). Prestige could be obtained through investing one\'s wealth in grand estates or townhouses, luxury items, [public entertainments](#Spectacles), funerary monuments, and [religious dedications](/wiki/Votum 'Votum'). Guilds _([collegia](/wiki/Collegium 'Collegium'))_ and corporations _(corpora)_ provided support for individuals to succeed through networking. \"There can be little doubt that the lower classes of \... provincial towns of the Roman Empire enjoyed a high [standard of living](/wiki/Standard_of_living 'Standard of living') not equaled again in Western Europe until the 19th century\". Households in the top 1.5% of [income distribution](/wiki/Income_distribution 'Income distribution') captured about 20% of income. The \"vast majority\" produced more than half of the total income, but lived near [subsistence](/wiki/Subsistence 'Subsistence').

### Currency and banking

See also: [Roman currency](/wiki/Roman_currency 'Roman currency') and [Roman finance](/wiki/Roman_finance 'Roman finance')

The early Empire was monetized to a near-universal extent, using money as a way to express [prices](/wiki/Price 'Price') and [debts](/wiki/Debt 'Debt'). The _[sestertius](/wiki/Sestertius 'Sestertius')_ (English \"sesterces\", symbolized as _HS_) was the basic unit of reckoning value into the 4th century, though the silver _[denarius](/wiki/Denarius 'Denarius')_, worth four sesterces, was also used beginning in the [Severan dynasty](/wiki/Severan_dynasty 'Severan dynasty'). The smallest coin commonly circulated was the bronze _[as](</wiki/As_(Roman*coin)> 'As (Roman coin)')*, one-tenth _denarius_. [Bullion](/wiki/Bullion 'Bullion') and [ingots](/wiki/Ingot 'Ingot') seem not to have counted as _pecunia_ (\"money\") and were used only on the frontiers. Romans in the first and second centuries counted coins, rather than weighing them---an indication that the coin was valued on its face. This tendency towards [fiat money](/wiki/Fiat_money 'Fiat money') led to the [debasement](/wiki/Debasement 'Debasement') of Roman coinage in the later Empire. The standardization of money throughout the Empire promoted trade and [market integration](/wiki/Market_integration 'Market integration'). The high amount of metal coinage in circulation increased the [money supply](/wiki/Money_supply 'Money supply') for trading or saving. Rome had no [central bank](/wiki/Central_bank 'Central bank'), and regulation of the banking system was minimal. Banks of classical antiquity typically kept [less in reserves](/wiki/Fractional_reserve_banking 'Fractional reserve banking') than the full total of customers\' deposits. A typical bank had fairly limited [capital](/wiki/Financial_capital 'Financial capital'), and often only one principal. [Seneca](/wiki/Seneca_the_Younger 'Seneca the Younger') assumes that anyone involved in [Roman commerce](/wiki/Roman_commerce 'Roman commerce') needs access to [credit](</wiki/Credit_(finance)> 'Credit (finance)'). A professional [deposit](/wiki/Deposit_account 'Deposit account') banker received and held deposits for a fixed or indefinite term, and lent money to third parties. The senatorial elite were involved heavily in private lending, both as creditors and borrowers. The holder of a debt could use it as a means of payment by transferring it to another party, without cash changing hands. Although it has sometimes been thought that ancient Rome lacked [documentary transactions](/wiki/Negotiable_instrument 'Negotiable instrument'), the system of banks throughout the Empire permitted the exchange of large sums without physically transferring coins, in part because of the risks of moving large amounts of cash. Only one serious credit shortage is known to have occurred in the early Empire, in 33 AD; generally, available capital exceeded the amount needed by borrowers. The central government itself did not borrow money, and without [public debt](/wiki/Public_debt 'Public debt') had to fund [deficits](/wiki/Government_budget_balance 'Government budget balance') from cash reserves.

Emperors of the [Antonine](/wiki/Antonine_dynasty 'Antonine dynasty') and [Severan](/wiki/Severan_dynasty 'Severan dynasty') dynasties debased the currency, particularly the _denarius_, under the pressures of meeting military payrolls. Sudden inflation under [Commodus](/wiki/Commodus 'Commodus') damaged the credit market. In the mid-200s, the supply of [specie](/wiki/Bullion_coin 'Bullion coin') contracted sharply. Conditions during the [Crisis of the Third Century](/wiki/Crisis_of_the_Third_Century 'Crisis of the Third Century')---such as reductions in long-distance trade, disruption of mining operations, and the physical transfer of gold coinage outside the empire by invading enemies---greatly diminished the money supply and the banking sector. Although Roman coinage had long been fiat money or [fiduciary currency](/wiki/Fiduciary_currency 'Fiduciary currency'), general economic anxieties came to a head under [Aurelian](/wiki/Aurelian 'Aurelian'), and bankers lost confidence in coins. Despite [Diocletian](/wiki/Diocletian 'Diocletian')\'s introduction of the gold _[solidus](</wiki/Solidus_(coin)> 'Solidus (coin)')\_ and monetary reforms, the credit market of the Empire never recovered its former robustness.

### Mining and metallurgy

Main articles: [Mining in ancient Rome](/wiki/Mining_in_ancient_Rome 'Mining in ancient Rome') and [Roman metallurgy](/wiki/Roman_metallurgy 'Roman metallurgy')

The main mining regions of the Empire were the Iberian Peninsula (gold, silver, copper, tin, lead); Gaul (gold, silver, iron); Britain (mainly iron, lead, tin), the [Danubian provinces](/wiki/Danubian_provinces 'Danubian provinces') (gold, iron); [Macedonia](</wiki/Macedonia_(Roman_province)> 'Macedonia (Roman province)') and [Thrace](/wiki/Thracia 'Thracia') (gold, silver); and Asia Minor (gold, silver, iron, tin). Intensive large-scale mining---of alluvial deposits, and by means of [open-cast mining](/wiki/Open-cast_mining 'Open-cast mining') and [underground mining](/wiki/Underground_mining 'Underground mining')---took place from the reign of Augustus up to the early 3rd century, when the instability of the Empire disrupted production.

[Hydraulic mining](/wiki/Hydraulic_mining 'Hydraulic mining') allowed [base](/wiki/Base_metal 'Base metal') and [precious metals](/wiki/Precious_metal 'Precious metal') to be extracted on a proto-industrial scale. The total annual iron output is estimated at 82,500 [tonnes](/wiki/Tonnes 'Tonnes'). Copper and lead production levels were unmatched until the [Industrial Revolution](/wiki/Industrial_Revolution 'Industrial Revolution'). At its peak around the mid-2nd century, the Roman silver stock is estimated at 10,000 t, five to ten times larger than the combined silver mass of [medieval Europe](/wiki/Early_Middle_Ages 'Early Middle Ages') and the [Caliphate](/wiki/Abbasid_Caliphate 'Abbasid Caliphate') around 800 AD. As an indication of the scale of Roman metal production, lead pollution in the [Greenland ice sheet](/wiki/Greenland_ice_sheet 'Greenland ice sheet') quadrupled over prehistoric levels during the Imperial era and dropped thereafter.

### Transportation and communication

Further information: [Cursus publicus](/wiki/Cursus_publicus 'Cursus publicus')

The Empire completely encircled the Mediterranean, which they called \"our sea\" _([mare nostrum](/wiki/Mare_nostrum 'Mare nostrum'))_. Roman sailing vessels navigated the Mediterranean as well as major rivers. Transport by water was preferred where possible, as moving commodities by land was more difficult. Vehicles, wheels, and ships indicate the existence of a great number of skilled woodworkers.

Land transport utilized the advanced system of [Roman roads](/wiki/Roman_roads 'Roman roads'), called \"_viae_\". These roads were primarily built for military purposes, but also served commercial ends. The in-kind taxes paid by communities included the provision of personnel, animals, or vehicles for the _[cursus publicus](/wiki/Cursus_publicus 'Cursus publicus')_, the state mail and transport service established by Augustus. Relay stations were located along the roads every seven to twelve [Roman miles](/wiki/Roman_mile 'Roman mile'), and tended to grow into villages or trading posts. A _[mansio](/wiki/Mansio 'Mansio')_ (plural _mansiones_) was a privately run service station franchised by the imperial bureaucracy for the _cursus publicus_. The distance between _mansiones_ was determined by how far a wagon could travel in a day. Carts were usually pulled by mules, travelling about 4 mph.

### Trade and commodities

See also: [Roman commerce](/wiki/Roman_commerce 'Roman commerce'), [Indo-Roman trade relations](/wiki/Indo-Roman_trade_relations 'Indo-Roman trade relations'), and [Sino-Roman relations](/wiki/Sino-Roman_relations 'Sino-Roman relations')

Roman provinces traded among themselves, but trade extended outside the frontiers to regions as far away as [China](/wiki/Ancient_China 'Ancient China') and [India](/wiki/Gupta_Empire 'Gupta Empire'). Chinese trade was mostly conducted overland through middle men along the [Silk Road](/wiki/Silk_Road 'Silk Road'); Indian trade also occurred by sea from [Egyptian](/wiki/Roman_Egypt 'Roman Egypt') ports. The main [commodity](/wiki/Commodity 'Commodity') was grain. Also traded were olive oil, foodstuffs, _[garum](/wiki/Garum 'Garum')_ ([fish sauce](/wiki/Fish_sauce 'Fish sauce')), slaves, ore and manufactured metal objects, fibres and textiles, timber, [pottery](/wiki/Ancient_Roman_pottery 'Ancient Roman pottery'), [glassware](/wiki/Roman_glass 'Roman glass'), marble, [papyrus](/wiki/Papyrus 'Papyrus'), spices and _[materia medica](/wiki/Materia_medica 'Materia medica')_, ivory, pearls, and gemstones. Though most provinces could produce wine, [regional varietals](/wiki/Ancient_Rome_and_wine 'Ancient Rome and wine') were desirable and wine was a central trade good.

### Labour and occupations

Inscriptions record 268 different occupations in Rome and 85 in Pompeii. Professional associations or trade guilds _(collegia)_ are attested for a wide range of occupations, some quite specialized.

Work performed by slaves falls into five general categories: domestic, with epitaphs recording at least 55 different household jobs; [imperial or public service](/wiki/Slavery_in_ancient_Rome#Servus_publicus 'Slavery in ancient Rome'); urban crafts and services; agriculture; and mining. Convicts provided much of the labour in the mines or quarries, where conditions were notoriously brutal. In practice, there was little division of labour between slave and free, and most workers were illiterate and without special skills. The greatest number of common labourers were employed in agriculture: in Italian industrial farming _([latifundia](/wiki/Latifundia 'Latifundia'))_, these may have been mostly slaves, but elsewhere slave farm labour was probably less important.

Textile and clothing production was a major source of employment. Both textiles and finished garments were traded and products were often named for peoples or towns, like a [fashion \"label\"](/wiki/Fashion_brand 'Fashion brand'). Better ready-to-wear was exported by local businessmen (_negotiatores_ or _mercatores_). Finished garments might be retailed by their sales agents, by _vestiarii_ (clothing dealers), or peddled by itinerant merchants. The [fullers](/wiki/Fulling 'Fulling') (_[fullones](/wiki/Fullonica 'Fullonica')_) and dye workers (_coloratores_) had their own guilds. _Centonarii_ were guild workers who specialized in textile production and the recycling of old clothes into [pieced goods](/wiki/Patchwork 'Patchwork').

## Architecture and engineering

Main articles: [Ancient Roman architecture](/wiki/Ancient_Roman_architecture 'Ancient Roman architecture'), [Roman engineering](/wiki/Roman_engineering 'Roman engineering'), and [Roman technology](/wiki/Roman_technology 'Roman technology')

The chief [Roman contributions to architecture](/wiki/Ancient_Roman_architecture 'Ancient Roman architecture') were the [arch](/wiki/Arch 'Arch'), [vault](</wiki/Vault_(architecture)> 'Vault (architecture)') and [dome](/wiki/Dome 'Dome'). Some Roman structures still stand today, due in part to sophisticated methods of making cements and [concrete](/wiki/Roman_concrete 'Roman concrete'). [Roman temples](/wiki/Roman_temple 'Roman temple') developed [Etruscan](/wiki/Etruscan_architecture 'Etruscan architecture') and Greek forms, with some distinctive elements. [Roman roads](/wiki/Roman_roads 'Roman roads') are considered the most advanced built until the early 19th century. The system of roadways facilitated military policing, communications, and trade, and were resistant to floods and other environmental hazards. Some remained usable for over a thousand years.

[Roman bridges](/wiki/Roman_bridges 'Roman bridges') were among the first large and lasting bridges, built from stone (and in most cases concrete) with the arch as the basic structure. The largest Roman bridge was [Trajan\'s bridge](/wiki/Trajan%27s_bridge "Trajan's bridge") over the lower Danube, constructed by [Apollodorus of Damascus](/wiki/Apollodorus_of_Damascus 'Apollodorus of Damascus'), which remained for over a millennium the longest bridge to have been built. The Romans built many [dams and reservoirs](/wiki/List_of_Roman_dams_and_reservoirs 'List of Roman dams and reservoirs') for water collection, such as the [Subiaco Dams](/wiki/Subiaco_Dams 'Subiaco Dams'), two of which fed the [Anio Novus](/wiki/Anio_Novus 'Anio Novus'), one of the largest aqueducts of Rome.

The Romans constructed numerous [aqueducts](/wiki/Roman_aqueduct 'Roman aqueduct'). _[De aquaeductu](/wiki/De_aquaeductu 'De aquaeductu')_, a treatise by [Frontinus](/wiki/Frontinus 'Frontinus'), who served as [water commissioner](/wiki/Curator_Aquarum 'Curator Aquarum'), reflects the administrative importance placed on the water supply. Masonry channels carried water along a precise [gradient](</wiki/Grade_(slope)> 'Grade (slope)'), using [gravity](/wiki/Gravity 'Gravity') alone. It was then collected in tanks and fed through pipes to public fountains, baths, [toilets](/wiki/Sanitation_in_ancient_Rome 'Sanitation in ancient Rome'), or industrial sites. The main aqueducts in Rome were the [Aqua Claudia](/wiki/Aqua_Claudia 'Aqua Claudia') and the [Aqua Marcia](/wiki/Aqua_Marcia 'Aqua Marcia'). The complex system built to supply Constantinople had its most distant supply drawn from over 120 km away along a route of more than 336 km. Roman aqueducts were built to remarkably fine [tolerance](/wiki/Engineering_tolerance 'Engineering tolerance'), and to a technological standard not equalled until modern times. The Romans also used aqueducts in their extensive mining operations across the empire.

[Insulated glazing](/wiki/Insulated_glazing 'Insulated glazing') (or \"double glazing\") was used in the construction of [public baths](/wiki/Thermae 'Thermae'). Elite housing in cooler climates might have [hypocausts](/wiki/Hypocaust 'Hypocaust'), a form of central heating. The Romans were the first culture to assemble all essential components of the much later [steam engine](/wiki/Steam_engine 'Steam engine'): the crank and connecting rod system, [Hero](/wiki/Hero_of_Alexandria 'Hero of Alexandria')\'s [aeolipile](/wiki/Aeolipile 'Aeolipile') (generating steam power), the [cylinder](/wiki/Pneumatic_cylinder 'Pneumatic cylinder') and [piston](/wiki/Piston 'Piston') (in metal force pumps), non-return [valves](/wiki/Valves 'Valves') (in water pumps), and [gearing](/wiki/Gear_train 'Gear train') (in water mills and clocks).

## Daily life

Main article: [Culture of ancient Rome](/wiki/Culture_of_ancient_Rome 'Culture of ancient Rome')

### City and country

The city was viewed as fostering civilization by being \"properly designed, ordered, and adorned.\" Augustus undertook a vast building programme in Rome, supported public displays of art that expressed imperial ideology, and [reorganized the city](/wiki/14_regions_of_Augustan_Rome '14 regions of Augustan Rome') into neighbourhoods _([vici](/wiki/Vicus 'Vicus'))_ administered at the local level with police and firefighting services. A focus of Augustan monumental architecture was the [Campus Martius](/wiki/Campus_Martius 'Campus Martius'), an open area outside the city centre: the Altar of Augustan Peace ([_[Ara Pacis Augustae](/wiki/Ara_Pacis_Augustae 'Ara Pacis Augustae')_]) was located there, as was [an obelisk](/wiki/Obelisk_of_Montecitorio 'Obelisk of Montecitorio') imported from Egypt that formed the pointer _([gnomon](/wiki/Gnomon 'Gnomon'))_ of a [horologium](/wiki/Solarium_Augusti 'Solarium Augusti'). With its public gardens, the Campus was among the most attractive places in Rome to visit.

City planning and urban lifestyles was influenced by the Greeks early on, and in the Eastern Empire, Roman rule shaped the development of cities that already had a strong Hellenistic character. Cities such as [Athens](/wiki/Ancient_Athens 'Ancient Athens'), [Aphrodisias](/wiki/Aphrodisias 'Aphrodisias'), [Ephesus](/wiki/Ephesus 'Ephesus') and [Gerasa](/wiki/Gerasa 'Gerasa') tailored city planning and architecture to imperial ideals, while expressing their individual identity and regional preeminence. In areas inhabited by Celtic-speaking peoples, Rome encouraged the development of urban centres with stone temples, forums, monumental fountains, and amphitheatres, often on or near the sites of preexisting walled settlements known as _[oppida](/wiki/Oppidum 'Oppidum')_. Urbanization in Roman Africa expanded on Greek and Punic coastal cities.

The network of cities (_[coloniae](</wiki/Colonia_(Roman)> 'Colonia (Roman)')_, _[municipia](/wiki/Municipium 'Municipium')_, _[civitates](/wiki/Civitas 'Civitas')_ or in Greek terms _[poleis](/wiki/Polis 'Polis')\_) was a primary cohesive force during the Pax Romana. Romans of the 1st and 2nd centuries were encouraged to \"inculcate the habits of peacetime\". As the classicist [Clifford Ando](/wiki/Clifford_Ando 'Clifford Ando') noted:

> Most of the cultural [appurtenances](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/appurtenance 'wikt:appurtenance') popularly associated with imperial culture---[public cult](/wiki/Religion_in_ancient_Rome 'Religion in ancient Rome') and its [games](/wiki/Ludi 'Ludi') and [civic banquets](/wiki/Epulones 'Epulones'), competitions for artists, speakers, and athletes, as well as the funding of the great majority of public buildings and public display of art---were financed by private individuals, whose expenditures in this regard helped to justify their economic power and legal and provincial privileges.

In the city of Rome, most people lived in multistory apartment buildings _([insulae](</wiki/Insula_(building)> 'Insula (building)'))_ that were often squalid firetraps. Public facilities---such as baths _([thermae](/wiki/Thermae 'Thermae'))_, toilets with running water _(latrinae)_, basins or elaborate fountains _([nymphea](/wiki/Nymphaeum 'Nymphaeum'))\_ delivering fresh water, and large-scale entertainments such as [chariot races](/wiki/Chariot_races 'Chariot races') and [gladiator combat](/wiki/Gladiator 'Gladiator')---were aimed primarily at the common people. Similar facilities were constructed in cities throughout the Empire, and some of the best-preserved Roman structures are in Spain, southern France, and northern Africa.

The public baths served hygienic, social and cultural functions. Bathing was the focus of daily socializing. Roman baths were distinguished by a series of rooms that offered communal bathing in three temperatures, with amenities that might include an [exercise room](/wiki/Palaestra 'Palaestra'), [sauna](/wiki/Sudatorium 'Sudatorium'), [exfoliation](</wiki/Exfoliation_(cosmetology)> 'Exfoliation (cosmetology)') spa, [ball court](/wiki/Sphaeristerium 'Sphaeristerium'), or outdoor swimming pool. Baths had [hypocaust](/wiki/Hypocaust 'Hypocaust') heating: the floors were suspended over hot-air channels. Public baths were part of urban culture [throughout the provinces](/wiki/List_of_Roman_public_baths 'List of Roman public baths'), but in the late 4th century, individual tubs began to replace communal bathing. Christians were advised to go to the baths only for hygiene.

Rich families from Rome usually had two or more houses: a townhouse _([domus](/wiki/Domus 'Domus')_) and at least one luxury home _([villa](/wiki/Roman_villa 'Roman villa'))_ outside the city. The _domus_ was a privately owned single-family house, and might be furnished with a private bath _(balneum)_ but it was not a place to retreat from public life. Although some neighbourhoods show a higher concentration of such houses, they were not segregated enclaves. The _domus_ was meant to be visible and accessible. The atrium served as a reception hall in which the _[paterfamilias](/wiki/Paterfamilias 'Paterfamilias')_ (head of household) met with [clients](/wiki/Patronage_in_ancient_Rome 'Patronage in ancient Rome') every morning. It was a centre of family religious rites, containing a [shrine](/wiki/Lararium 'Lararium') and [images of family ancestors](/wiki/Roman_funerals_and_burial#Funerary_art 'Roman funerals and burial'). The houses were located on busy public roads, and ground-level spaces were often rented out as shops _([tabernae](/wiki/Taberna 'Taberna'))_. In addition to a kitchen garden---windowboxes might substitute in the _insulae_---townhouses typically enclosed a [peristyle](/wiki/Peristyle 'Peristyle') garden.

The villa by contrast was an escape from the city, and in literature represents a lifestyle that balances intellectual and artistic interests _([otium](/wiki/Otium 'Otium'))_ with an appreciation of nature and agriculture. Ideally a villa commanded a view or vista, carefully framed by the architectural design. It might be located on a working estate, or in a \"resort town\" on the seacoast.

Augustus\' programme of urban renewal, and the growth of Rome\'s population to as many as one million, was accompanied by nostalgia for rural life. Poetry idealized the lives of farmers and shepherds. Interior decorating often featured painted gardens, fountains, landscapes, vegetative ornament, and animals, rendered accurately enough to be identified by species. On a more practical level, the central government took an active interest in supporting [agriculture](/wiki/Agriculture_in_ancient_Rome 'Agriculture in ancient Rome'). Producing food was the priority of land use. Larger farms _([latifundia](/wiki/Latifundium 'Latifundium'))_ achieved an [economy of scale](/wiki/Economy_of_scale 'Economy of scale') that sustained urban life. Small farmers benefited from the development of local markets in towns and trade centres. Agricultural techniques such as [crop rotation](/wiki/Crop_rotation 'Crop rotation') and [selective breeding](/wiki/Selective_breeding 'Selective breeding') were disseminated throughout the Empire, and new crops were introduced from one province to another.

Maintaining an affordable food supply to the city of Rome had become a major political issue in the late Republic, when the state began to provide a grain dole ([Cura Annonae](/wiki/Cura_Annonae 'Cura Annonae')) to citizens who registered for it (about 200,000--250,000 adult males in Rome). The dole cost at least 15% of state revenues, but improved living conditions among the lower classes, and subsidized the rich by allowing workers to spend more of their earnings on the wine and olive oil produced on estates. The grain dole also had symbolic value: it affirmed the emperor\'s position as universal benefactor, and the right of citizens to share in \"the fruits of conquest\". The _annona_, public facilities, and spectacular entertainments mitigated the otherwise dreary living conditions of lower-class Romans, and kept social unrest in check. The satirist [Juvenal](/wiki/Juvenal 'Juvenal'), however, saw \"[bread and circuses](/wiki/Bread_and_circuses 'Bread and circuses')\" _(panem et circenses)_ as emblematic of the loss of republican political liberty:

> The public has long since cast off its cares: the people that once bestowed commands, consulships, legions and all else, now meddles no more and longs eagerly for just two things: bread and circuses.

### Health and disease

Further information: [Disease in Imperial Rome](/wiki/Disease_in_Imperial_Rome 'Disease in Imperial Rome'), [Antonine plague](/wiki/Antonine_plague 'Antonine plague'), and [Plague of Cyprian](/wiki/Plague_of_Cyprian 'Plague of Cyprian')

[Epidemics](/wiki/Epidemics 'Epidemics') were common in the ancient world, and occasional [pandemics](/wiki/Pandemic 'Pandemic') in the Empire killed millions. The Roman population was unhealthy. About 20 percent---a large percentage by ancient standards---lived in cities, Rome being the largest. The cities were a \"demographic sink\": the death rate exceeded the birth rate and constant immigration was necessary to maintain the population. Average lifespan is estimated at the mid-twenties, and perhaps more than half of children died before reaching adulthood. Dense urban populations and [poor sanitation](/wiki/Sanitation_in_ancient_Rome 'Sanitation in ancient Rome') contributed to disease. Land and sea connections facilitated and sped the transfer of infectious diseases across the empire\'s territories. The rich were not immune; only two of emperor Marcus Aurelius\'s fourteen children are known to have reached adulthood.

The importance of a good diet to health was recognized by medical writers such as [Galen](/wiki/Galen 'Galen') (2nd century). Views on nutrition were influenced by beliefs like [humoral theory](/wiki/Humoral_theory 'Humoral theory'). A good indicator of nutrition and disease burden is average height: the average Roman was shorter in stature than the population of pre-Roman Italian societies and medieval Europe.

### Food and dining

Main article: [Food and dining in the Roman Empire](/wiki/Food_and_dining_in_the_Roman_Empire 'Food and dining in the Roman Empire')

See also: [Ancient Roman cuisine](/wiki/Ancient_Roman_cuisine 'Ancient Roman cuisine') and [Ancient Rome and wine](/wiki/Ancient_Rome_and_wine 'Ancient Rome and wine')

Most apartments in Rome lacked kitchens, though a charcoal [brazier](/wiki/Brazier 'Brazier') could be used for rudimentary cookery. Prepared food was sold at pubs and bars, inns, and food stalls _([tabernae](/wiki/Taberna 'Taberna'), cauponae, [popinae](/wiki/Popina 'Popina'), [thermopolia](/wiki/Thermopolium 'Thermopolium'))_. [Carryout](/wiki/Carryout 'Carryout') and restaurants were for the lower classes; [fine dining](/wiki/Fine_dining 'Fine dining') appeared only at dinner parties in wealthy homes with a [chef](/wiki/Chef 'Chef') _(archimagirus)_ and kitchen staff, or banquets hosted by social clubs _([collegia](</wiki/Collegium_(ancient*Rome)> 'Collegium (ancient Rome)'))*.

Most Romans consumed at least 70% of their daily [calories](/wiki/Calorie 'Calorie') in the form of cereals and [legumes](/wiki/Legumes 'Legumes'). _[Puls](</wiki/Puls_(food)> 'Puls (food)')_ (pottage) was considered the food of the Romans, and could be elaborated to produce dishes similar to [polenta](/wiki/Polenta 'Polenta') or [risotto](/wiki/Risotto 'Risotto'). Urban populations and the military preferred bread. By the reign of [Aurelian](/wiki/Aurelian 'Aurelian'), the state had begun to distribute the \_annona_ as a daily ration of bread baked in state factories, and added [olive oil](/wiki/Olive_oil 'Olive oil'), wine, and pork to the dole.

Roman literature focuses on the dining habits of the upper classes, for whom the evening meal _([cena](/wiki/Cena 'Cena'))_ had important social functions. Guests were entertained in a finely decorated dining room _([triclinium](/wiki/Triclinium 'Triclinium'))_ furnished with couches. By the late Republic, women dined, reclined, and drank wine along with men. The poet Martial describes a dinner, beginning with the _gustatio_ (\"tasting\" or \"appetizer\") salad. The main course was [kid](/wiki/Goat_meat 'Goat meat'), beans, greens, a chicken, and leftover ham, followed by a dessert of fruit and wine. Roman \"[foodies](/wiki/Foodie 'Foodie')\" indulged in [wild game](/wiki/Wild_game 'Wild game'), [fowl](/wiki/Fowl 'Fowl') such as [peacock](/wiki/Peacock 'Peacock') and [flamingo](/wiki/Flamingo 'Flamingo'), large fish ([mullet](</wiki/Mullet_(fish)> 'Mullet (fish)') was especially prized), and [shellfish](/wiki/Shellfish 'Shellfish'). Luxury ingredients were imported from the far reaches of empire. A book-length collection of Roman recipes is attributed to [Apicius](/wiki/Apicius 'Apicius'), a name for several figures in antiquity that became synonymous with \"[gourmet](/wiki/Gourmet 'Gourmet').\"

Refined cuisine could be moralized as a sign of either civilized progress or decadent decline. Most often, because of the importance of landowning in Roman culture, produce---cereals, legumes, vegetables, and fruit---were considered more civilized foods than meat. The [Mediterranean staples](/wiki/Mediterranean_diet 'Mediterranean diet') of [bread](/wiki/Sacramental_bread 'Sacramental bread'), [wine](/wiki/Sacramental_wine 'Sacramental wine'), and [oil](/wiki/Chrism 'Chrism') were [sacralized](/wiki/Sanctification 'Sanctification') by Roman Christianity, while Germanic meat consumption became a mark of [paganism](/wiki/Germanic_paganism 'Germanic paganism'). Some philosophers and Christians resisted the demands of the body and the pleasures of food, and adopted [fasting](/wiki/Fasting 'Fasting') as an ideal. Food became simpler in general as urban life in the West diminished and trade routes were disrupted; the Church formally discouraged [gluttony](/wiki/Gluttony 'Gluttony'), and hunting and [pastoralism](/wiki/Pastoralism 'Pastoralism') were seen as simple and virtuous.

### Spectacles

See also: [Ludi](/wiki/Ludi 'Ludi'), [Chariot racing](/wiki/Chariot_racing 'Chariot racing'), and [Recitationes](/wiki/Recitationes 'Recitationes')

When [Juvenal](/wiki/Juvenal 'Juvenal') complained that the Roman people had exchanged their political liberty for \"bread and circuses\", he was referring to the state-provided grain dole and the _circenses_, events held in the entertainment venue called a _[circus](</wiki/Circus_(building)> 'Circus (building)')_. The largest such venue in Rome was the [Circus Maximus](/wiki/Circus_Maximus 'Circus Maximus'), the setting of [horse races](/wiki/Horse_racing 'Horse racing'), [chariot races](/wiki/Chariot_races 'Chariot races'), the equestrian [Troy Game](/wiki/Lusus_Troiae 'Lusus Troiae'), staged beast hunts _([venationes](/wiki/Venatio 'Venatio'))_, athletic contests, [gladiator combat](/wiki/Gladiator 'Gladiator'), and [historical re-enactments](/wiki/Historical_re-enactment 'Historical re-enactment'). From earliest times, several [religious festivals](/wiki/Roman_festivals 'Roman festivals') had featured games _([ludi](/wiki/Ludi 'Ludi'))_, primarily horse and chariot races _(ludi circenses)\_. The races retained religious significance in connection with agriculture, [initiation](/wiki/Initiation_ritual 'Initiation ritual'), and the cycle of birth and death.

Under Augustus, public entertainments were presented on 77 days of the year; by the reign of Marcus Aurelius, this had expanded to 135. Circus games were preceded by an elaborate parade (_[pompa circensis](/wiki/Pompa_circensis 'Pompa circensis')_) that ended at the venue. Competitive events were held also in smaller venues such as the [amphitheatre](/wiki/Roman_amphitheater 'Roman amphitheater'), which became the characteristic Roman spectacle venue, and stadium. Greek-style athletics included [footraces](</wiki/Stadion_(running_race)> 'Stadion (running race)'), [boxing](/wiki/Ancient_Greek_boxing 'Ancient Greek boxing'), [wrestling](/wiki/Greek_wrestling 'Greek wrestling'), and the [pancratium](/wiki/Pankration 'Pankration'). Aquatic displays, such as the mock sea battle _([naumachia](/wiki/Naumachia 'Naumachia'))_ and a form of \"water ballet\", were presented in engineered pools. State-supported [theatrical events](#Performing_arts) _([ludi scaenici](/wiki/Ludi_scaenici 'Ludi scaenici'))_ took place on temple steps or in grand stone theatres, or in the smaller enclosed theatre called an _[odeon](</wiki/Odeon_(building)> 'Odeon (building)')\_.

Circuses were the largest structure regularly built in the Roman world. The Flavian Amphitheatre, better known as the [Colosseum](/wiki/Colosseum 'Colosseum'), became the regular arena for blood sports in Rome. Many [Roman amphitheatres](/wiki/List_of_Roman_amphitheatres 'List of Roman amphitheatres'), [circuses](</wiki/Circus_(building)#List_of_Roman_circuses> 'Circus (building)') and [theatres](</wiki/Roman_theatre_(structure)> 'Roman theatre (structure)') built in cities outside Italy are visible as ruins today. The local ruling elite were responsible for sponsoring spectacles and arena events, which both enhanced their status and drained their resources. The physical arrangement of the amphitheatre represented the order of Roman society: the emperor in his opulent box; senators and equestrians in reserved advantageous seats; women seated at a remove from the action; slaves given the worst places, and everybody else in-between. The crowd could call for an outcome by booing or cheering, but the emperor had the final say. Spectacles could quickly become sites of social and political protest, and emperors sometimes had to deploy force to put down crowd unrest, most notoriously at the [Nika riots](/wiki/Nika_riots 'Nika riots') in 532.

The chariot teams were known by the [colours they wore](/wiki/Chariot_racing#Factions 'Chariot racing'). Fan loyalty was fierce and at times erupted into [sports riots](/wiki/Sports_riots 'Sports riots'). Racing was perilous, but charioteers were among the most celebrated and well-compensated athletes. Circuses were designed to ensure that no team had an unfair advantage and to minimize collisions (_naufragia_), which were nonetheless frequent and satisfying to the crowd. The races retained a magical aura through their early association with [chthonic](/wiki/Chthonic 'Chthonic') rituals: circus images were considered protective or lucky, [curse tablets](/wiki/Curse_tablet 'Curse tablet') have been found buried at the site of racetracks, and charioteers were often suspected of sorcery. Chariot racing continued into the Byzantine period under imperial sponsorship, but the decline of cities in the 6th and 7th centuries led to its eventual demise.

The Romans thought gladiator contests had originated with [funeral games](</wiki/Funeral_games_(antiquity)> 'Funeral games (antiquity)') and [sacrifices](/wiki/Sacrifice_in_ancient_Roman_religion 'Sacrifice in ancient Roman religion'). Some of the earliest [styles of gladiator fighting](/wiki/List_of_Roman_gladiator_types 'List of Roman gladiator types') had ethnic designations such as \"[Thracian](/wiki/Thraex 'Thraex')\" or \"Gallic\". The staged combats were considered _munera_, \"services, offerings, benefactions\", initially distinct from the festival games _(ludi)_. To mark the opening of the Colosseum, [Titus](/wiki/Titus 'Titus') presented [100 days of arena events](/wiki/Inaugural_games_of_the_Flavian_Amphitheatre 'Inaugural games of the Flavian Amphitheatre'), with 3,000 gladiators competing on a single day. Roman fascination with gladiators is indicated by how widely they are depicted on mosaics, wall paintings, lamps, and in graffiti. Gladiators were trained combatants who might be slaves, convicts, or free volunteers. Death was not a necessary or even desirable outcome in matches between these highly skilled fighters, whose training was costly and time-consuming. By contrast, _noxii_ were convicts sentenced to the arena with little or no training, often unarmed, and with no expectation of survival; physical suffering and humiliation were considered appropriate [retributive justice](/wiki/Retributive_justice 'Retributive justice'). These executions were sometimes staged or ritualized as re-enactments of [myths](/wiki/Greek_mythology 'Greek mythology'), and amphitheatres were equipped with elaborate [stage machinery](/wiki/Stagecraft 'Stagecraft') to create special effects.

Modern scholars have found the pleasure Romans took in the \"theatre of life and death\" difficult to understand. [Pliny the Younger](/wiki/Pliny_the_Younger 'Pliny the Younger') rationalized gladiator spectacles as good for the people, \"to inspire them to face honourable wounds and despise death, by exhibiting love of glory and desire for victory\". Some Romans such as [Seneca](/wiki/Seneca_the_Younger 'Seneca the Younger') were critical of the brutal spectacles, but found virtue in the courage and dignity of the defeated fighter---an attitude that finds its fullest expression with the [Christians martyred](/wiki/Christian_martyr 'Christian martyr') in the arena. Tertullian considered deaths in the arena to be nothing more than a dressed-up form of [human sacrifice](/wiki/Human_sacrifice 'Human sacrifice'). Even [martyr literature](/wiki/Acts_of_the_martyrs 'Acts of the martyrs'), however, offers \"detailed, indeed luxuriant, descriptions of bodily suffering\", and became a popular genre at times indistinguishable from fiction.
